---
layout: post
title: China is self-consistent
description: how to reconcile Mao and Deng's different visions
tags: politics philosophy communism 
categories: China
featured: true
date: 2024-07-03
---

China has put two images to the world. First, there is Mao's China, when the Bolsheviks and the former poor peasants "ruled the country". Of course, Mao is the one who was actually in power, but this fact did not actually contradict with "poor people's ruling", since Mao's cult of personality envelops the lower-class of China, completely. There were intricate dynamics between Mao and his followers, but that's a topic for another time. Mao's China, ideologically, adhered with the Soviet Union's original vision of communism, a society with no presence of oppressors, and thus the vast majority of people can live better lives. Nonetheless, for some reason, people suffered, arguably more than any other non-communist country.

Deng Xiaoping, the successor of Mao who was not handpicked by him, subverts this poor, communist image of China by embracing capitalism to an extent. Fast forward 40 years, China has become the major manufacturer for the whole world. In the golden age of 2010s, you can see product made in China from almost all stores. China has become an authoritarian regime with a booming economy, with no lack of CEOs, bankers, and real estate company owners. These people, once vilified in Mao's China, are calling the shots. The government officials are still in control, but in a more shadowy way, hiding behind the veil of pseudo-companies.

The current ruler of China, Xi, has told the Chinese people this order: don't use the old 30 years to negate the new 30 years, and don't use the new 30 years to negate the old 30 years either. What he is saying is about reconciling these two images of China, Mao's communism and Deng's capitalism. Xi, with his unquestionable authority, wants to stop people from seeing these two eras as contradictions, but as a sort of natural progression, both necessary to achieve the final utopia, true communism, where people do not get things based on how much they have worked, but rather on how much they need.

How is this possible? How can the poor peasants, who had the right to execute the merchant class and discriminate their kindreds (called the “<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_Black_Categories">five black categories </a> "), understand that in current China, business owners are de facto a part of the ruling class? How can the entrepreneurs, with money and a (albeit small) share of power, come to terms with the fact that, in theory, they should be eliminated? There is no easy way to see China as a continuation. Netizens in China interested in politics have split into two communities: the leftists who adore Mao's vision of China, and the rightists who hold libertarian views. At this very moment, they are engaging in an eternal debate, often escalating to personal attacks, about the future of China. Sadly, all these debates are for nothing, because these online Chinese folks don't have a say in the future of China at all. No matter what they think and what they say, they have no choice but to follow the orders given by the people who are actually in charge.

In the end, you might think, that China does not have anything new at all. Mao's vision is essentially the Soviet Union's vision, and Deng's vision is the same as any other authoritarian regime. However, we current have Xi's China, and Xi's China is different from Mao's China or Deng's China. It is, roughly speaking, an amalgamation of the former two. It essentially argues that, if communism wants to succeed in the world where it is surrounded by capitalistic regimes, it has to beat capitalists at their own game. In other words, it has to out-compete them. It needs to demonstrate that a communist regime is more efficient at producing goods than any other capitalist regime. A communist's vision is only viable after this feat has been achieved. Therefore, Mao's old China was useful in the sense that it beat Chinese folks into believing communism in a religious kind of way. But it had this huge blindspot, the economy. Deng realized this deficit, and corrects it by introducing a version of "controlled capitalism", capitalism under the control of a vastly powerful government. Now, as China would argue to the world, it can produce products that are cheaper, more in number, and higher in quality than any other country. And it achieves this by deliberately avoiding converting to a liberal democracy. China's model is a way of organizing society that extract the competitiveness of a free market without making anything "free"; everything is always under control of the CCP. 

This is a trend amongst experts on China in the US and Europe that characterizes China as a capitalist authoritarian regime under the veil of communism. I argue that it is exactly the reverse: China is a communist regime under the guise of capitalism. It is always trying to make communism come true. Capitalism is but a tool in China's toolbox. 


 

